---
layout: default
---

# Calvin's Commentary on Timothy, Titus, Philemon
## 2 Tim. 1:3-5

###Verse 3

*I give thanks:* Usually it is understood by this phrasing that Paul “gives thanks to God” for whatever is named next, in this case that “without ceasing I have remembered you in my prayers night and day.” But let my readers consider if the following way of translating this phrase makes as much sense or more: “Whenever I remember you in my prayers (and I do so continually), I also give thanks concerning you;” the particle ώϛ very frequently has that meaning and in fact any meaning we can come up with for a different translation is pretty weak.  According to this translation, prayer is a sign of caring and thanksgiving is a sign of joy; that is Paul never thinks of Timothy without celebrating all that is good in him.

That is the reason for his thanksgiving – remembering the gifts of God is always pleasant and delightful to believers! And both are proof of real friendship.  Paul calls the mention of him (αδίαλέπτον) unceasing because he never forgets him when he prays.  

*Whom I worship from my ancestors:* Paul adds this in response to slanders that were often spoken of him by the Jews, who treated him as if he'd forsaken the religion of his country and turned his back on the law of Moses.  On the contrary, Paul declares that he worships God, about whom he was taught by his ancestors - the God of Abraham who revealed himself to the people of Israel and gave his law through Moses- and not some made up god he created for himself.  

But here some may ask, “Since Paul is proudly following the religion of his ancestors, is that a good foundation for our faith in general?  Then we could excuse any superstition someone holds and argue that it would be a crime for anyone to turn away, even a little, from the traditions of their ancestors, whatever they are.”  The answer to that is simple.  Paul does not lay down a fixed rule, that everyone who folows the religions received from his or her ancestors is rightly worshipping God, nor is he saying that anyone who departs from his or her ancestors' customs is doing wrong.  We must take into account the circumstances; Paul was not descended from just any religion, but from the children of Abraham who worship the true God.  We know that Christ says, in contrast to the false worship of other religions, that the Jewish faith alone maintained true worship.  Paul does not rest solely on the authority of his ancestors and he is not speaking about all ancestors equally; rather he is trying to remove the opinion that he had turned his back on the God of Israel and made up a new god for himself. 

*In a pure conscience:* Certainly Paul's conscience has not always been pure; in Romans 7:8, he acknowledges that he was once a hypocrite, allowing sin to freely reign in his life.  St. Chrysostom excuses Paul for doing this when he was a Pharisee who opposed the gospel becaues of ignorance, rather than malice, but this is not a satisfactory explanation.  “In purse conscience” is not something anyone can claim apart from sincere and heartfelt reverence for God.  I would argue that Paul's pure conscience is limited to this present moment, and in this way, that Paul worships the God of his ancestors, but now with pure affection of hear since he has been enlightened by the gospel.  

This statement has the same goal as others by the apostles recorded in Acts 24:14, 26:6, and 28:20.

*In my prayers night and day:* here we see how constant Paul was in prayer, yet he is not going more himself than what Christ recommends to all his followers.  We should be moved by examples like this to immitate them, so that this necessary practice would happen more often among us today.  These's nothing wrong in understanding this phrase to refer to daily and nightly prayers which Paul would have said at a set time, but I think a more simple interpretation is that there was no time when Paul was not engaged in prayer.  

### Verse 5

*Calling to remembrance that unfeigned faith:* Paul commends the faith of Timothy's mother and grandmother to encourage and exhort Timothy more than to applaud him.  When someone has begun well, the progress made should encourage them to keep it up, and these examples from home are a powerful tool to urge Timothy forward.  So Paul reminds him of his grandmother Lois and his mother Eunice who had taught him godliness since he was a baby.  His godly education encourages Timothy not to fall away from who he is or where he came from.  

It is uncertain whether these women were converted to Christ at some point and that's why Paul commended their faith or whether they are viewed as faithful apart from Christianity.  It seem more probable that they were not converted.  Even when surrounded by many superstitions and corruptions, God has always preserved his own people who are not corrupted by the people around them and who God sanctified and set apart for himself so that among the people of Israel there always remained a pledge of grace, the promised seed of Abraham.  So it is not beyond belief to say that these women lived and died in faith although Christ had not been revealed to them.  But I don't assert anything as certain and couldn't without far too much boldness.

*And I am persuaded that in thee also*: This clause confirms me in the idea I just stated; in my opinion Paul isn't speaking of the present faith of Timothy.  I would be less confident if Paul had only said that he reckoned Timothy's faith resembled the faith of his mother and grandmother.  But I understand the meaning here to be that Timothy was taught to revere God as a child, even before he knew the gospel, and that faith from his childhood proved to be a living seed that grew to faith in Christ afterward.  