___
layout: default
---

# Calvin's Commentary on Timothy, Titus, Philemon
## 2 Tim. 1:6-12

### Verse 6

*For this reason I remind you:* The words "for this reason" introduce this advice as a conclusion of what has just been said; so Paul implies that the more Timothy knows God's grace (by his faith), the more intentional he should be about growing in that grace each day.

*To stir up the gift of God*: This is an important reminder because it usually happens - we might even say it's nature - that a great gift makes us careless and even lazy.  Satan is constantly working to extinguish all that is of God in us.  Therefore we should strive to perfect everything good in ourselves and kindle whatever lacks energy.  The metaphor Paul uses here is of a fire that is weak and would gradually go out if someone didn't blow on it and add fuel to the fire.  So too, we should remember to use the gifts of God so they don't grow rusty from being hidden and unused.  We ought to faithfully see results from them so they aren't extinguished by laziness.
 
*Which is in thee by the laying on of my hands*: There's no doubt that Timothy was affirmed by the whole church and not elected only because of Paul's private wish, but because Paul was a chief actor in it he can speak of electing Timothy personally.  However, here he refers to the act of confirring the office in ordination itself, rather than election.  It is unclear whether at that time when a minister set apart the custom was for everyone to lay their hands on the person or just one person would have done it on behalf of everyone else.  I am inclined to believe it was only one person who laid on his or her hands.  

The ceremony itself was borrowed by the Apostles from an ancient custom of Israel; or maybe we should say they retained it since it was already in use; this is part of the procedure Paul recommends for doing things decently and in order in 1 Corinthians 14:40.  It could be doubted that the laying on of hands mentioned here even refers to ordination because at that time the graces of the Spirit which Paul speaks of in Romans 12 and in 1 Corinthians 13 were being bestowed on many others who were not appointed to be pastors.  But personally, I think it can be easily inferred from 1 Timothy 4:14 that here Paul is speaking of the office of pastor.  

So once this is settled some might ask "is some grace given by this outward sign (of laying on hands)? To this question I would say, whenever ministeres were ordained, they were recommended to God by the whole church and in this way grace from God was given to them through prayer, but it was not given to them because of the sign.  At the same time the sign of laying on hands isn't useless or a waste of time, but was a pledge of the grace they recieved from God's own hand.  The ceremony is not a wordly act invented only to gain credit in the eyes of others, but a lawful setting-apart of a person before God, which is not done except by the power of the Holy Spirit.  Besides, Paul speaks of the sign as the ordination itself; because he declares that Timothy was given grace, when he was offered to God as a minister.  This was of speaking is a figure of speech where a part is taken as a reference to the whole.  

But that leads us to another question.  If it was only at his ordination that Timothy recievd the grace necessary to fulfill his role, why was he elected to it when he was not yet gifted for it? I say, it was not given when Paul ordained him to the ministry as though he didn't have it before then.  But that's not inconsistent with saying that when God wanted to make use of Timothy and called him that he enriched him with new gifts or doubled the ones he already had.  Just because grace was given in ordination doesn't mean that Timothy didn't have any gifts before, but his gifts manifested even more when the duty of teaching was laid upon him.  

# Verse 7

*For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice*: Affirming what he just said Paul continues to urge Timothy to display the power of the gifts he's received.  He argues that God leads his ministers by the Spirit of Power, which is the opposite cowardice. Thus they should not give in to slothfulness, but sustained by great confidence and cheerfulness they should visibly demonstrate the power of the Spirit.  

  In Romans 8:15 Paul saus, "For we have not recieved a spirit of bondage, to live in fear, but we have received the Spirit of adoption by which we cry "Abba, Father!" 
  
   That passage seems similar to this at first glance, but the context shows a difference in meansing.  In Romans Paul talks about the confidence of adoption all believers recieve, but here he speaks particularly about ministerys and instructs them all, thgouth Timothy to actively pursue good deeds because God doesn't want them to just go through the motions, carrying out their office lifelessly, but to press forward powerfully, relying on the work of the Spirit  
   
    *But of power, and of love, and of soberness*: So we are taught first, that none of us possess the dedication and determination of the Spirit which is needed to fulfill our ministry until we are filled with a new power from heaven.  In fact there are so many great obstacles that no human courage could oversome them, so God fills us with the "spirit of power." Even those who seem powerful in other ways, fall in a moment when they're not upheld by the Holy Spirit.  
    
    Secondly, we gather that the timid and cowardly who don't dare do anything in defense of truth when it is necessary are not led by the Spirit who guides the servants of Christ.  That's why there are so few who can be sincerely called ministers today, because among so many where do we find one who, relying on the power of the Spirit, bodly despises all the haughtiness which exalts itself against Christ?  Don't almost all seek their own interests and their own leisure?  Don't they sink into silence as soon as controversy breaks out?  As a result the majesty of God is not shows in their ministries.  The word Spirit here, is used figuratively as in many other passages.
    
    So why did Paul add love and soberness?  In my opinion, it was for the purpose of distinguisihing the power of the Spirit from the fury and rage of fanatics who rush forward on reckless impulses, fiercely boasting that they have the Spirit of God.  So Paul tells us that this powerful energy is moderated by "soberness and love," that is by a calm desire to edify others.  