---
layout: default
---

# Calvin's Commentary on Timothy, Titus, Philemon
## 2 Tim. 1:1-2

> 1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus, 2 To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy; and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 

### Verse 1 

*Paul an Apostle*: Right away we see that Paul must have in mind that more people than just Timothy are going to read this letter – why would he make a point to assert his title as an apostle to someone who is already fully convinced of his authority?  Instead Paul acts in his public role here especially because, as he approaches death, he wants to make sure his ministry and all he has worked so hard to teach is sealed and kept accurately by Timothy and respected by all who come after him.  

*Of Jesus Christ by the will of God*: Paul is following his customary wording when he calls himself an “Apostle of Christ” - reminding us that he speaks not as a private person to be taken lightly, but as a representative of Christ. But because being an apostle is such a weighty claim for any one person to hold except by the gift and grace of God, Paul also adds that he was chosen by the will of God for this role.  It is beyond dispute because God placed him and upholds him in this position.  

*According to the promise of life*: To make his calling even more certain, Paul connects it to God's promise of eternal life; it's as if he'd said, “As from the beginning God promised eternal life in Christ, so now he has appointed me to be the minister for proclaiming that promise.”  In this way Paul is also pointing out the purpose of his role, to bring others to Christ so that they too may find life in him!  

*Which is in Christ Jesus*: In Acts 26:6 Paul accurately notes that “the promise of life” was given, in ancient times, to the patriarchs.  But here he declares that this same life is found in Christ, telling us that the faith of those who lived under the law must nevertheless have looked forward to Christ. The life which was given in those promises was also in someways suspended until it could be fully revealed in Christ.  

### Verse 2

*My beloved son*: by calling him his son, Paul not only shows his love for Timothy, but also hopes to pass on some of his respect and acknowledgement (as an apostel) to Timothy as the one who may justly be called his son.  Paul can be called Timothy's father as the one who had “begotten” Timothy in Christ; though this honor truly belongs to God alone, it can also be said of those God uses to accomplish his work of rebirth in our own lives.  

*Grace, mercy:* Mercy is a word Paul often leaves out of his ordinary salutations.  I think he added it when he poured out his feelings with special intensity.  He also seems to have changed the usual order of things here because “mercy” is the cause for “grace” it should come first in the passage.  But it still makes sense to put it after “grace” as an explanation of the nature of grace and grace where it comes from.  Adding “mercy” is like adding a declaration that the reason we are loved by God is because he is merciful.  It may also be thought of as highlighting what God does for us every day – showing his mercy when he delivers us from evil, forgives our sin, and bears with our weaknesses because of his compassion on us.  

